README.md, before:

# node-aff [![CircleCI](https://img.shields.io/circleci/project/srijs/node-aff/master.svg?maxAge=2592000&style=flat-square)](https://circleci.com/gh/srijs/node-aff) [![Coveralls](https://img.shields.io/coveralls/srijs/node-aff/master.svg?maxAge=2592000&style=flat-square)](https://coveralls.io/github/srijs/node-aff) [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/aff.svg?maxAge=2592000&style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/aff)

_Asynchronous effect system for TypeScript_

## Disclaimer

This project has been published to provide a basis for discussion and to gather
feedback from the community. It is not ready for use in an production environment.

## Installation

`aff` is available via `npm`:

    npm install aff

## Introduction

The `aff` effect system allows you to easily compose functions that have side-effects, while being completely in control over which effects those are and how they are executed. It mainly concerns itself with handling "native" effects, i.e. effects which are provided by the runtime system, and which cannot be emulated by pure functions.

Some examples of native, asynchronous effects are:

- Reading and writing files
- Executing and handling network requests
- Spawning and terminating processes
- Performing expensive computations in the background

### The `Eff` type

The `aff` package defines a type called `Eff`, which describes an effectful computation. That computation can perform effects of some kind, and yields a result or an error.

Let's start with an example:

```
'use strict';

import {random} from 'aff/std/random';
import {log} from 'aff/std/console';

function printRandom() {
  return random().andThen(n => log(n));
}
```

What we defined here is a function that performs two side-effects: It gets a random number between 0 and 1 from a non-deterministic entropy source, and it prints that number out to the console.

That does't sounds so different from the things we can with vanilla Node.js, does it? So what does `aff` actually give us in addition? The answer is that `aff` allows us make explicit and to restrict the effects that the function has.

To take advantage of those capabilities, all we need to do is add a type signature to it:

```
'use strict';

import {Eff} from 'aff';
import {RANDOM, random} from 'aff/std/random';
import {CONSOLE, log} from 'aff/std/console';

function printRandom<F>(): Eff<{random: RANDOM, console: CONSOLE} & F, void> {
  return random().andThen(n => log(n));
}
```

We are going to discuss the signatures in more detail later, but for now you can focus on the fact that the signature explicitly mentions `RANDOM` and `CONSOLE`, indicating that `printRandom` performs effects that affect the random entropy source and the console output.

What happens if we removed one of those from the type signature?

```
'use strict';

import {Eff} from 'aff';
import {RANDOM, random} from 'aff/std/random';
import {CONSOLE, log} from 'aff/std/console';

function printRandom<F>(): Eff<{random: RANDOM} & F, void> {
  return random().andThen(n => log(n));
}
```

```
>> src/example.ts(8,10): error TS2322: Type 'Eff<{ random: RANDOM; } & { console: CONSOLE; } & {}, void>' is not assignable to type 'Eff<{ random: RANDOM; } & F, void>'.
>>   Type '{ random: RANDOM; } & { console: CONSOLE; } & {}' is not assignable to type '{ random: RANDOM; } & F'.
>>     Type '{ random: RANDOM; } & { console: CONSOLE; } & {}' is not assignable to type 'F'.
>>       Type '{ console: CONSOLE; }' is not assignable to type 'F'.
```

Uh oh, that looks like the compiler is not happy: It is complaining that our signature does not specify the `CONSOLE` type. Indeed, when you use `aff` effects, you need to specify all the effects your function performs (or leave off the signature completely and let the compiler figure it out for you).

### Combining effectful computations

#### In Sequence

To combine two effectful computations in sequence, the `andThen` function can be used, which works roughly the same as `then` in Promise land. It takes an effectful computation and chains a function after it, so that it will get called with the result of the computation. The function in turn returns a new effectful computation. To understand things in detail, we need to take a look at the type signature:

```
class Eff<F, T> {
    public andThen<G, U>(f: (x: T) => Eff<G, U>): Eff<F & G, U>;
}
```

This might seem complicated at first, but let's break it down a bit. `Eff<F, T>` describes an effectful computation that results in a value of type `T`, while performing effects of type `F`. We can combine it with a function that takes that resulting `T`, and returns a new computation `Eff<G, U>`. The result of that combination is the computation `Eff<F & G, U>`, which tells us that it performs effects from both input effects `F` and `G`, and results in a value of type `U`.

#### In Parallel

To combine two effectful computations in parallel, the `parallel` function can be used:

```
class Eff<F, T> {
    public parallel<G, U>(eff: Eff<G, U>): Eff<F & G, [T, U]>;
}
```

### Streams

Streams provide a simple but powerful streaming abstraction. They consist of two concepts: Sinks and Sources.

#### Sinks

Sinks are stream consumers. More concretely, they describe how to reduce a stream, by providing three actions:

- `onStart: () => Eff<Fx, State>`
- `onData: (s: State, i: Input) => Eff<Fx, State>`
- `onEnd: (s: State) => Eff<Fx, Result>`

Those three actions are called in order during the lifecycle of the stream.
When a stream starts, `onStart` is called, returning an effectful computation that results in an initial state. As data flows through the stream, `onData` is called multiple times with the current state
and a bit of input, providing the next state. The next `onData` won't be called unless the effectful
computation returned from the previous call terminates, providing a way to handle back-pressure.
At the point where the stream is exhausted, `onEnd` will be called once with the last state, finalizing
it into the end result.

#### Sources

Sources are the objects that take a sink and run it. Two sources of the same type can be combined into a new source, which provides a simple way to build up sources from lots of different parts, concatenating
many effectful data fetches.

Commit message:

add small motivation chapter to readme

README.md, after:

# node-aff [![CircleCI](https://img.shields.io/circleci/project/srijs/node-aff/master.svg?maxAge=2592000&style=flat-square)](https://circleci.com/gh/srijs/node-aff) [![Coveralls](https://img.shields.io/coveralls/srijs/node-aff/master.svg?maxAge=2592000&style=flat-square)](https://coveralls.io/github/srijs/node-aff) [![npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/aff.svg?maxAge=2592000&style=flat-square)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/aff)

_Asynchronous effect system for TypeScript_

## Motivation

Side-effects are inevitable. What's more, without them, the software we write would be worthless. Many of the useful things that software does begin with a side effect, and end in one, leaving no trace of its execution but those side-effects. Be it on the command line, where we read input from the user and print some output as our program ends, or as a web server, where we start by reading a request, and finish by writing out a response.

While it is commonly accepted that we want to keep the side-effects outside of the core logic of our programs as much as possible, which leads to code that is easier to test and refactor, it still means we can't avoid side-effects. At one point or another, but hopefully as marginally as possible in our program, we need to deal with them.

Consequently, there is not only great merit in avoiding side-effects, but also in being able to exert as much control over them as possible at the inevitable point where we have to face them. In order for us as craftspeople to do that, we need to have the appropriate tools for the job.

## Disclaimer

This project has been published to provide a basis for discussion and to gather
feedback from the community. It is not ready for use in an production environment.

## Installation

`aff` is available via `npm`:

    npm install aff

## Introduction

The `aff` effect system allows you to easily compose functions that have side-effects, while being completely in control over which effects those are and how they are executed. It mainly concerns itself with handling "native" effects, i.e. effects which are provided by the runtime system, and which cannot be emulated by pure functions.

Some examples of native, asynchronous effects are:

- Reading and writing files
- Executing and handling network requests
- Spawning and terminating processes
- Performing expensive computations in the background

### The `Eff` type

The `aff` package defines a type called `Eff`, which describes an effectful computation. That computation can perform effects of some kind, and yields a result or an error.

Let's start with an example:

```
'use strict';

import {random} from 'aff/std/random';
import {log} from 'aff/std/console';

function printRandom() {
  return random().andThen(n => log(n));
}
```

What we defined here is a function that performs two side-effects: It gets a random number between 0 and 1 from a non-deterministic entropy source, and it prints that number out to the console.

That does't sounds so different from the things we can with vanilla Node.js, does it? So what does `aff` actually give us in addition? The answer is that `aff` allows us make explicit and to restrict the effects that the function has.

To take advantage of those capabilities, all we need to do is add a type signature to it:

```
'use strict';

import {Eff} from 'aff';
import {RANDOM, random} from 'aff/std/random';
import {CONSOLE, log} from 'aff/std/console';

function printRandom<F>(): Eff<{random: RANDOM, console: CONSOLE} & F, void> {
  return random().andThen(n => log(n));
}
```

We are going to discuss the signatures in more detail later, but for now you can focus on the fact that the signature explicitly mentions `RANDOM` and `CONSOLE`, indicating that `printRandom` performs effects that affect the random entropy source and the console output.

What happens if we removed one of those from the type signature?

```
'use strict';

import {Eff} from 'aff';
import {RANDOM, random} from 'aff/std/random';
import {CONSOLE, log} from 'aff/std/console';

function printRandom<F>(): Eff<{random: RANDOM} & F, void> {
  return random().andThen(n => log(n));
}
```

```
>> src/example.ts(8,10): error TS2322: Type 'Eff<{ random: RANDOM; } & { console: CONSOLE; } & {}, void>' is not assignable to type 'Eff<{ random: RANDOM; } & F, void>'.
>>   Type '{ random: RANDOM; } & { console: CONSOLE; } & {}' is not assignable to type '{ random: RANDOM; } & F'.
>>     Type '{ random: RANDOM; } & { console: CONSOLE; } & {}' is not assignable to type 'F'.
>>       Type '{ console: CONSOLE; }' is not assignable to type 'F'.
```

Uh oh, that looks like the compiler is not happy: It is complaining that our signature does not specify the `CONSOLE` type. Indeed, when you use `aff` effects, you need to specify all the effects your function performs (or leave off the signature completely and let the compiler figure it out for you).

### Combining effectful computations

#### In Sequence

To combine two effectful computations in sequence, the `andThen` function can be used, which works roughly the same as `then` in Promise land. It takes an effectful computation and chains a function after it, so that it will get called with the result of the computation. The function in turn returns a new effectful computation. To understand things in detail, we need to take a look at the type signature:

```
class Eff<F, T> {
    public andThen<G, U>(f: (x: T) => Eff<G, U>): Eff<F & G, U>;
}
```

This might seem complicated at first, but let's break it down a bit. `Eff<F, T>` describes an effectful computation that results in a value of type `T`, while performing effects of type `F`. We can combine it with a function that takes that resulting `T`, and returns a new computation `Eff<G, U>`. The result of that combination is the computation `Eff<F & G, U>`, which tells us that it performs effects from both input effects `F` and `G`, and results in a value of type `U`.

#### In Parallel

To combine two effectful computations in parallel, the `parallel` function can be used:

```
class Eff<F, T> {
    public parallel<G, U>(eff: Eff<G, U>): Eff<F & G, [T, U]>;
}
```

### Streams

Streams provide a simple but powerful streaming abstraction. They consist of two concepts: Sinks and Sources.

#### Sinks

Sinks are stream consumers. More concretely, they describe how to reduce a stream, by providing three actions:

- `onStart: () => Eff<Fx, State>`
- `onData: (s: State, i: Input) => Eff<Fx, State>`
- `onEnd: (s: State) => Eff<Fx, Result>`

Those three actions are called in order during the lifecycle of the stream.
When a stream starts, `onStart` is called, returning an effectful computation that results in an initial state. As data flows through the stream, `onData` is called multiple times with the current state
and a bit of input, providing the next state. The next `onData` won't be called unless the effectful
computation returned from the previous call terminates, providing a way to handle back-pressure.
At the point where the stream is exhausted, `onEnd` will be called once with the last state, finalizing
it into the end result.

#### Sources

Sources are the objects that take a sink and run it. Two sources of the same type can be combined into a new source, which provides a simple way to build up sources from lots of different parts, concatenating
many effectful data fetches.
